# Outputs-Model
How will a zero-fare public transport policy affect motorization rates and other modes of transport in the future?
According to the European Environment Agency, air pollutant concentrations in Europe remain too high with air quality problems persisting, despite a decrease in emissions over the past decades (EEA:2020). Such air pollution does not only pose serious health risks for citizens, 90% of whom are exposed to harmful pollutant levels but pressing environmental consequences such as acidification, eutrophication, and crop damage (idem). Hence, many European countries have set out policies and plans to reduce such anthropogenic emissions. Reducing carbon emissions worldwide appears as a key challenge, especially in the transport sector. The air pollution emitted from motorized fossil-fueled vehicles is widely accepted as one of the central causes of these issues, especially in metropolitan cities. In 2016, transport generated ca. 8 gigatonnes of CO2 globally, with road transport accounting for 74% of these emissions, followed by air- (12%) and waterborne transport (11%); cars account for almost 44% of transport GHG emissions in the EU. To be on a sustainable path, the transport system needs to substantially reduce the level of air pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions it emits annually. (Vilchez et al., 2019).
Therefore, many nations have turned to public transport as a potential intermediate solution to high motorization rates across Europe, and several countries have already implemented networks of electric vehicles running on renewable energy (Sheung: 2020, Elstad: 2022). However, the only country that has managed to make public transport completely free thus far is Luxembourg. According to the Ministry of Mobility and Public Works, the Luxembourg government is hoping for environmental benefits as well as alleviating heavy congestion (Lo: 2020). Luxemburg has had the highest motorization levels in Europe for years, and this free public transport scheme has inspired hopes that these numbers will decrease in the coming years. In 2022, Malta also followed in Luxembourg’s footsteps by implementing a zero-fare policy, as well as Spain and the Italian region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia, launching free train travel on specific routes for a limited period. However, these zero-fare policies only offer insights at the local scale, for either microstates or specific regions/routes, and not at a global scale. Luxemburg has had the highest motorization levels in Europe for years, and this free public transport scheme has inspired hopes that these numbers will decrease in the future.
Moreover, with the increased awareness of the degradation of the environment, consumer’s environmental concern has increased (Ramayah et al. 2012; Chen and Tung 2014) which we predict will allow a decrease in motorization rates for fossil-fueled cars or at the very least, more electrical vehicles. This project will aim to provide a predictive agent-based model of the change in willingness to use public transport and the future motorization rates of Luxembourg following the free transport policy. It is hypothesised that the use of public transport will remain stagnant at first, but after the creation of habits of use within society, its use will exponentially increase, while motorization rates will decrease; this model will allow us to accept or reject this hypothesis and offer a framework for potential policy change in public transport fares in other nations.
The results of this model will be relevant in understanding the role of public transport in climate change and CO2 levels, and whether making it free is a possible solution to said emissions with environmental and health consequences due to air pollution, as well as boosting investment worldwide in the public transport sector to combat climate change. The research question is the following: How will a zero-fare public transport policy affect motorization rates and other modes of transport in the future?
